protein structure and function

-cells produce tens of thousands of distinct proteins
-amino acids are the building blocks of proteins
    -amino acids were most likely abundant during chemical evolution

20 amino acids (charged, polar, nonpolar)

amino acids are bonded to:
-H a hydrogen atom
-NH2 an amino functional group
-COOH a carboxyl function group
-R group -a variable "side chain"

in water, the amino and carboxyl groups ionize to NH3+ and COO-. respectively
    -amino group acts as a base and attracts a proton
    -carboxyl group acts as an acid and donates a proton
the resulting charges
    -help amino acids stay in solution
    -make amino acids more reactive

acid -> donates proton
base -> accepts proton

the 20 amino acids differ only in the unique R-group, or side chain, attached to the centrol carbon
the properties of amino acids are determined by their R-groups
side chains can be grouped into 3 types:
    1. charged (hydrophilic)
        -acidic, negatively charged (-)
        -basic, positively charged (+)
    2. uncharged polar (hydrophilic)
    3. nonpolar (hydrophobic)

does the amino acid have a + or - charge on its side chain (r-group) -> yes -> it is electrically charged and hydrophilic
does the amino acid have an oxygen in its side chain -> yes -> it is polar, uncharged, and hydrophilic

no to both questions -> it is nonpolar, uncharged, and hydrophobic

proteins are a type of biological macromolecule
    -> large molecules made of smaller subunits
proteins are polymers (many units)
    subunits are called monomers ("one part")
    monomers link together (polymerize) to form polymers ("many parts") through the process of polymerization
amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins

monomers polymerize through condensation reactions
    results in the loss of a water molecule
condensation:
    monomer IN
    water OUT

polymers depolymerize through hydrolysis
    breaks polymers apart by adding a water molecule
hydrolysis:
    water IN
    monomer OUT

amino acids polymerize when a bond forms between a carboxyl group of one amino acid and an amino group of another
the resulting C--N bond is called a peptide bond
    unusually stable because of a pair of valence electrons on nitrogen are partially shared in the C--N bond

peptide bonds bind amino acids together form a "backbone" with:
    1. side chain/R group orientation extended out, allowing interactions with each other or water
    2. directionality
        the end with the free amino group is the N-terminus
        the end with the free carboxyl group is the C-terminus
    3. flexibility
        single bonds on either side of the peptide bond can rotate

proteins have diverse cellular functions because structure gives rise to function

4 levels of protein structure
1. primary: sequence of amino acids, determined by genetic code
2. secondary: localized 3D structure, depends on hydrogen bonds between backbone atoms
3. tertiary: overall 3D shape of single polypeptide, depends on different types of interactions between R-groups/side chains
4. quaternary: overall 3D shape of complexes consisting of two or more polypeptides

primary structure is fundamental to the higher levels of protein structure
the amino acid R-groups/side chains affect a polypeptides properties and function
    a single amino change can radically alter protein function

secondary structure is formed by hydrogen bonding between:
    the carbonyl group of one amino acid
    the amino group of another amino acid
    NOT between R-groups/side chains

two types of secondary structure:
    -(alpha) helices
    -(beta) pleated sheets

tertiary structure
the tertiary structure of a polypeptide results from interactions between:
    R-groups/side chains
    R-groups/side chains and peptide backbone
these contacts cause backbone to bend and fold into the distinctive 3D shape

Five Different R-group/Side chain Interactions Define Tertiary Structure
1. hydrogen bonds: from between polar side chains and opposite partial charges
2. hydrophobic interactions: water forces hydrophobic side chains together
3. van der waals interactions: weak electrical interactions between hydrophobic side chains in extremely close proximity
4. disulfide bonds: form bridfes between two sulfydryl groups
5. ionic bonds: form between groups with full and opposing charges


